Now that we had a look at unit tests,
what they are, why we use them and integration tests,
let's have a look at end-to-end tests or user interface tests. For this, I'll need to install another tool.
So I'll quit my jest process here and I will install, with save dev, puppeteer, which is a headless version
of Chrome, of the Chrome browser.
So it basically is a browser we can use to interact with the DOM and so on,
we can even run in a version with the head,
so where we see the browser and we can basically define steps that should be executed in that browser
so that we can automate certain processes on our web page
and then of course test the result of these processes as well.
Now this download will take a while because in the end it downloads the entire Chrome codebase because
it needs that to be able to simulate that browser
ANd once it's done, I'll be back.
So I'm done installing it,
LEt's start using puppeteer now and for that, I'll go to my utiltest.js file and I will import puppeteer.
So I'll import puppeteer by requiring it from puppeteer like this and I will write a new test
now and there, I will just write should click around for now, we'll fix this later or change this later
and in this function which should be executed here, I want to use puppeteer.
Now how can I use it?
First of all I set up a browser by using puppeteer launch.
Now this will launch a browser with some options which I can define here,
for example I can set headless to false to actually run a browser with a user interface as well,
you can set a bunch of stuff here and you can find it all in the official docs of puppeteer of course.
I will also set slomo here,
that will basically slow down the automated operations so that we have a chance of seeing what's happening
and I'll set it to a value of 80 and we can also set some args here which is an array where I can
pass dash dash in and for example window size to launch this browser with these arguments and window
size allows me to set a width height pair, so I can set this to 1920 and 1080 for
example, like this, this should launch a browser with this size and that of course can be great
to also test if certain responsive features are working the way you want.
So now this will create a browser.
Now actually, this will return a promise,
so we can use async await here if we want to by placing async in front of this pair of arguments here
or this empty argument list
and now we can await this to launch. The alternative would be to just use then and catch, async await
in the end does this for you.
So here I'm awaiting this and storing the result in browser you could say, as a next step,
I can now create a page object by awaiting the browser to create a new page, like this.
Now I'll also need to tell the browser which page to load and I'll grab my URL here and then we can
say page, go to
and then you enter your URL which should be loaded and you also should await this because all these
browser related things are promises that simply take some time to execute
so you have to await each step.
So now this should open a browser and load this page.
Let's try this by running npm test and it should indeed open up a brand new window in Chromium which
is basically like a Chrome or
the core functionality of Chrome and you also see that this is being tested or controlled by automated
test software.
So this was opened automatically,
now let's go back and let's add some logic here.
We don't just want to go to that page,
let's say we also want to enter something. For that I want to enter something into my input with the
ID name and age,
so in my test I will await a step or I use that page where I navigate into my app where I will then
click into the field with that selector, so click takes the selector of the item it should click on.
Once I click there, I will type
and again you can find all commands in the official puppeteer docs, so you can really like instruct
the browser, the headless browser,
what to do. So I want to type and I want to type into the same input and we wouldn't have to click on
it first but I want to simulate all the steps a user would do
and I want to insert let's say Anna here to mix it up, not always Max.
So now I type in there,
I will repeat these steps once I type the name for the age,
so for the age field I will enter 28 let's say. And if you save that,
it will open up a new window where you can see that it enters
these things. Now we can now also add another step and click on this button at the bottom of our page,
so in app.js, in the end it's this button we're listening on for an event here with ID button add
user. We can grab that selector and make sure we click on that in our setup and now we get a full flow setup
where you see that this gets entered and then we click this button here at the end. You also saw that
it didn't add an item and this already shows us that writing this text was not the worst idea because
it looks like something was broken and indeed here in our automated test, if we open the developer tools,
we see that it didn't find the validate input function here. So since that was missing or is missing,
we have to check our util.js file and see what's wrong with validate input in here I'm using validate
input here and I'm defining it as a function here
but one thing I never did is I never recompiled my code,
that's something we have to do because the code that gets imported in the browser is packed with webpack
and I never recompiled it after changing my code.
So in a separate terminal window, I'll quickly run npm start to get webpack to run my code and
It'll now also watch my code and recompile if I change something
and with that, it should have executed your test automatically, in case it didn't, simply add a blank and
reopen your browser and enter and it will reopen the browser and execute this
and now you see this works and this puppeteer being used for automated testing with a graphical user
interface.
Now obviously, we can automate this a bit more and check the result programmatically now to see if we
got to the expected outcome because what I can now do is I can also await
and now that everything executed I can check if something is the case,
for example I can check for the existence of this list item with a class of user item being added to
it. So in my test, I can await my page and there, I can use $eval to get access to an element and
I will look for the first element with a class of user item and I pass a function as a second argument
to eval where I then define what I want to do with the element I selected there and here I will
get an element as an input and I will for example return the text content
and this means that now the result of this function will be returned by this overall promise,
so I can store it here.
Final text for example will be the text that I fetch from this element that was created and now I can
expect final text to be Anna, 28 years old.
Now it's again checking for that text but it's now using the full flow in the browser,
it's not just a unit or integration test as we have it up there,
it's really going through all the steps we would execute manually as well
and then of course we should have that text but we could check anything here.
We could also check for the existence of this class and we implicitly do so because if that class would
not be there, we couldn't select the element by it and therefore for final text would certainly not be
that text but now if I save this, it executes all our steps here and it actually fails here because it basically
timed out and
that's just a limit set up by jest to ensure that our tests don't take too long. What we can do for that
is the test function actually takes a third argument and that is the maximum timeout and we can set
this to 10 seconds to 10000 to increase the time we give our browser to complete its operation
so that it doesn't timeout
and now you see it finishes successfully because should click around, to which we should assign a better
name, does give us the result we want
and here I will now say should create an element with text and correct class, something like this.
By the way we can of course now also set headless to true, disable the slow motion and not set these
arguments
and this will now speed up the testing because now it doesn't have to go through that step in a real
browser, it does so behind the scenes
and that's one of the advantages of having a headless browser, that you don't have to watch it execute
the steps but it can be nice to see the steps, you can do both
and now we got a full e-to-e test or a user interface test in place too.